# Assets Management

Acorn's asset management system is meant to make handling your assets easier and more fluent. It also integrates with the build process, automatically handling things like cache-busting filenames, manifests, chunking, etc.

## Helper Functions

Although you can interact directly with the [underlying systems](https://github.com/roots/acorn/tree/2.x/src/Roots/Acorn/Assets) if you like, Acorn makes some helper functions available to you in the `Roots` namesspace:

## asset()

`asset(string $asset, ?string $manifest): Asset` - This returns an Asset object, which you can chain off of in several ways. `Roots\asset()` is the function to use if you want to deal with a single file, such as an image in your theme.
  
```php
$name = 'sandwich.png';

echo asset($name)->uri(); // https://tasty.food/theme/kitchen/assets/sandwich.png
echo asset($name)->path(); // /srv/www/site/app/themes/kitchent/assets/sandwich.ong

// When treated as a string, and Asset will return the URI of its asset:
echo asset($name); // https://tasty.food/theme/kitchen/assets/sandwich.png
```

Asset has many methods:

- `uri(): string` - The public URI (which you may know collquially as a URL) of the asset.
- `path(): string` - The filesystem path of the asset on your server.
- `exists(): bool` - Whether the asset exists.
- `contents(): string` - The raw content of the asset. Useful for SVGs and the like; less useful for a PNG.
- `base64(): string` - The raw content, but encoded in base64.
- `dataUrl(): string` - The asset in data URL form, like you might use in CSS.
- `dataUri(): string` - Alias of `dataUrl()`.
- `contentType(): string|false` - The data type of the asset if it can be determined; `false` otherwise.
- `mimeType(): string|false` - The MIME type of the asset, if it can be determined; `false` otherwise.
- `file(): SplFileInfo` - An [SplFileInfo](https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.splfileinfo.php) instance of the asset. If you don't know what that is, you probably don't need it.

## bundle()

`bundle(string $bundle, ?string $manifest = null): Bundle` - This returns a Bundle object, which you can use to enqueue and interact with your JS and CSS depencencies.

```php
$name = 'app';

// Enqueues all of the JS and CSS dependencies in the `app` bundle.
add_action('wp_enqueue_scripts', function() {
  bundle($name)->enqueue();
}, 100);

// Enqueues only the CSS dependencies in the `app` bundle.
add_action('wp_enqueue_scripts' function() {
  bundle($app)->enqueueCss();
}, 100);
```
  
The above is pretty standard--what you might be used to doing with core functions like `wp_enqueue_style()`, albeit somewhat more concise. 


## A Note About Runtimes

You may have noticed when looking at the Acorn source or the output on your pages, that when used with Bud Acorn will inline some JS called a "runtime." If you're familiar with modern webpack, you probably already know what a runtime is, and you can skip this section--what Bud generates is exactly what you're expecting.

If you *don't* know what a runtime is, the simple version is that it's some inline JavaScript that loads other JavaScript. It's generated by webpack and helps with code deduplication, since webpack knows everything in every one of your modules and can load this as needed and appropriately. Because of this, *you generally only want to have a single entry point per page*--just include whatever you need when defining the entry point, even if it overlaps with modules required by another entrypoint, and let webpack worry about the rest. Nothing else is needed: Bud and Acorn will handle the rest automatically.

An example? Sure:

Let's say you have two pages:

- Home, which will display an image carousel and has several accordions
- About, which has an image carousel

In this extremely contrived example, you might think to created the following entrypoints:

- `app` - This includes the carousel library, and generalized code to activate the carousel on the page
- `home` - This includes the accordion library, some code to acivate it on the homepage, as well as the carousel library and code to activate it on the homepage

Then you have some enquing logic that looks like this pseudo-code:

```php
bundle('app')->enqueue();

if (is_home()) {
  bundle('home')->enqueue();
}
```

This means that on your Home page, you'll be enquing two entrypoints. Because of the way your entrypoints are structured, *the carousel library will be downloaded twice*. Instead, you should let webpack handle deduplicating your dependencies with something like this:

- `app` - This includes generalized code used across the site
- `home` - The imports/requires `app`, and also includes the accordion library, some code to activate it on the homepage, and some code to acivate the carousel on the homepage

```php
if (is_home()) {
  bundle('home')->enqueue();
} else {
  bundle('app')->enqueue();
}
```

Webpack and Bud will now handle loading only the libraries necessary for each entrypoint, and only one entrypoint is loaded per page.

Obviously this example is very contrived! It's unlikely you'd write this code, and for such a simplistic example there are many many ways to solve the issue, but it should serve to illustrate on a basic level how you should think about entrypoints in the context of Acorn & Bud, and how they can do your work for you.
