---
ID: 6153
post_title: Nginx Includes
author: Ben Word
post_date: 2015-09-03 18:05:06
post_excerpt: ""
layout: doc
permalink: >
  https://roots.io/trellis/docs/nginx-includes/
published: true
---
The Nginx site conf generated by Trellis is designed to work with a wide range of WordPress installations, but your sites may require customization. For example, perhaps you use custom `rewrite`s to redirect legacy URLs, or maybe you would like to proxy some requests to another server. You may create custom Nginx `include` files or use child templates to extend the Trellis Nginx conf templates.

## `include` files

You may put your Nginx customizations in Ansible/Jinja2 templates, making full use of variables and logic. Store your template files in a new `nginx-includes` directory in your project's `trellis/` directory (e.g., sibling to `server.yml` playbook). If you prefer to name this directory `some-other-name`, you may define `nginx_includes_templates_path: some-other-name` in your `group_vars/all/main.yml`.

Trellis will recurse `nginx-includes` and template any files ending in `*.conf.j2` to the `/etc/nginx/includes.d/` directory on the remote, preserving the subdirectory structure. If you want to edit, add to, or delete your Nginx include files, edit them on the local machine and re-run the playbook. Tip: Append `--tags nginx-includes` to your command to run only the relevant portion of the playbook.

### Default
By default in Trellis, a WordPress site's Nginx conf will include any `nginx-includes` files found in a subdirectory named after the site. To illustrate, suppose you have two sites managed by Trellis, defined in `wordpress_sites` as follows:

```
wordpress_sites:
  site1:
    ...
  site2:
    ...
```

You could organize your `nginx-includes` templates in corresponding subdirectories:

```
trellis/
  nginx-includes/
    site1/
      rewrites.conf.j2
      proxy.conf.j2
    site2/
      rewrites.conf.j2
```

You could also have an "all" directory, which would apply conf to all sites:

```
trellis/
  nginx-includes/
    all/
      rewrites.conf.j2
```

The above directory structure would be templated to the remote server as follows:

```
/
  etc/
    nginx/
      includes.d/
        site1/
          rewrites.conf
          proxy.conf
        site2/
          rewrites.conf
```

To explicitly walk through the example, consider just the `site1` site key in the `wordpress_sites` list. The corresponding `nginx-includes/site1/` directory contains two confs which are templated to the remote's `/etc/nginx/includes.d/site1/`. The primary Nginx conf for `site1` will have a statement `include includes.d/site1/*.conf;`, thus including `rewrites.conf` and `proxy.conf`.

This `include` directive is located inside the primary `server` block, just before the primary `location` block. Explore the [Child templates](#child-templates) section below for more options if this default does not satisfy your needs.

Note that this default `include` directive per site will not recurse subdirectories within `includes.d/site1` so if you place templates in `nginx-includes/site1/somedir/*.conf.j2`, they will be templated to the remote's `includes.d/site1/somedir/*.conf` but will not be included by default. See the [Child templates](#child-templates) section below for how you could include such confs.

### File cleanup
By default, Trellis will remove from the remote's `includes.d` directory any `*.conf` file that lacks a corresponding template in your local machine's `nginx-includes`. If you prefer to leave all conf files on the remote, you may disable this file cleanup by defining `nginx_includes_d_cleanup: false` in `group_vars/all/main.yml`.

### Deprecated templates directory
The original implementation of Trellis Nginx includes required template files to be stored in `roles/wordpress-setup/templates/includes.d`. That directory is now deprecated and will no longer function beginning with Trellis 1.0. Please move your templates to a directory named `nginx-includes` in the root of this project. It is preferable to store user-created templates separate from Trellis core files.

Trellis Nginx includes were originally made possible thanks to @chriszarate in [#242](https://github.com/roots/trellis/pull/242).

## Child templates

You may use child templates to override any `block` in the two Nginx conf templates:

* [`roles/nginx/templates/nginx.conf.j2`](https://github.com/roots/trellis/blob/master/roles/nginx/templates/nginx.conf.j2) is templated to the server as `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf`
* [`roles/wordpress-setup/templates/wordpress-site.conf.j2`](https://github.com/roots/trellis/blob/master/roles/wordpress-setup/templates/wordpress-site.conf.j2) is templated to the server as `/etc/nginx/sites-available/example.com.conf` (per each site)

Create your child templates following the [Jinja template inheritance](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/latest/templates/#template-inheritance) docs and the guidelines below.

Tip: Once you have set up your child templates, append `--tags nginx-includes` to your command to run only the Nginx conf portions of the playbook.

### Designate a child template

You will need to inform Trellis of the child templates you have created.

#### `nginx_conf`

Use the `nginx_conf` variable to designate your child template for `nginx.conf.j2`. Given that this template applies to all sites, it would be appropriate to define the variable in a `group_vars/<environment>/main.yml` file (including `group_vars/all/main.yml`).

```
nginx_conf: nginx-includes/nginx.conf.child
```

The example above designates a child template in the `nginx-includes` path on your local machine (i.e., the default path for `nginx_includes_templates_path` variable; see [`include` files](#include-files) section above). You may choose a different path and assign the template any name and file extension you wish. When using the `nginx-includes` path, however, avoid using a filename that matches the `*.conf.j2` pattern required for `include` files described above.

#### `nginx_wordpress_site_conf`

Use the `nginx_wordpress_site_conf` variable to designate your child template for `wordpress-site.conf.j2`, which is used for each of your sites. To designate a global child template for all your sites, you could define the variable in a `group_vars/<environment>/main.yml` file.

```
nginx_wordpress_site_conf: nginx-includes/wordpress-site.conf.child
```

You may designate a child template per site by defining the variable in `group_vars/<environment>/wordpress_sites.yml`.

```
wordpress_sites:
  example.com:
    ...
    nginx_wordpress_site_conf: nginx-includes/example.com.conf.child
    ...
```

### Create a child template

Create your child templates at the paths you designated in the `nginx_conf` and `nginx_wordpress_site_conf` variables described above. [Child templates](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/latest/templates/#child-template) must include two elements:

* an `{% extends 'base_template' %}` statement
* one or more `{% block block_name %}` blocks

#### Child template example – simple

Here is an example child template that replaces the `http_begin` block in the `nginx.conf.j2` base template.

```
{% extends 'roles/nginx/templates/nginx.conf.j2' %}

{% block http_begin -%}
  server_names_hash_bucket_size 128;
  server_names_hash_max_size 512;
{% endblock %}
```

The path for your base template – referenced in your `extends` statement – must be relative to the `server.yml` playbook (i.e., relative to the Trellis root directory).

#### Child template example – complex

The first block in the example child template below augments the content of the `fastcgi_basic` block from the `wordpress-site.conf.j2` base template. It inserts `{{ super() }}`, which represents the original block content from the base template, then adds an extra `fastcgi_param`. The second block in the example rewrites the `redirects_https` block, omitting the `ssl_enabled` conditional and adding a new `listen 8080` directive.

```
{% extends 'roles/wordpress-setup/templates/wordpress-site.conf.j2' %}

    {% block fastcgi_basic -%}
    {{ super() }}
    fastcgi_param HTTPS on;
    {%- endblock %}

{% block redirects_https %}
# Redirect to https
server {
  listen 80;
  listen 8080;
  server_name {{ site_hosts | join(' ') }}{% if item.value.multisite.subdomains | default(false) %} *.{{ site_hosts_canonical | join(' *.') }}{% endif %};

  {{ self.acme_challenge() -}}

  location / {
    return 301 https://$host$request_uri;
  }
}

{% endblock -%}
```

You'll notice that these blocks use indentation and [whitespace control](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/latest/templates/#whitespace-control) (e.g., `-%}`) parallel to their counterparts in the the base template `wordpress-site.conf.j2`. This will achieve the best formatting of templated conf files on the server.

## Sites templates

You may use sites templates to add new sites confs to Nginx in addition to the standard WordPress confs.
They are also Ansible/Jinja2 templates, and thus can make full use of variables and logic.

Create your sites templates following the guidelines below.

Tip: Once you have set up your sites templates, append `--tags nginx-sites` to your command to run only the Nginx sites portions of the playbook.

### Default
By default in Trellis, a "no-default" site Nginx conf is included. Its purpose is to drop requests to unknown server names, preventing host header attacks and other potential problems.

The `nginx_sites_confs` variable contains the list of confs to be templated to the server's `sites-available` folder.
Its default value only registers the default site (whose template resides in `roles/nginx/templates/no-default.conf.j2`):

```yaml
nginx_sites_confs:
  - src: no-default.conf.j2
```

Each entry to this variable also has an `enabled` parameter, which can be omitted, and defaults to `true`.
It controls whether the conf is linked to the server's `sites-enabled` folder, and thus activated.
The above default is equivalent to:

```yaml
nginx_sites_confs:
  - src: no-default.conf.j2
    enabled: true
```

However, you might want to add other sites for specific purposes.

### Designate a site template

You will need to inform Trellis of the sites templates you have created.

#### `nginx_sites_confs`

Use the `nginx_sites_confs` variable to designate your new site template. Given that this template applies to all environments, it would be appropriate to define the variable in a `group_vars/<environment>/main.yml` file (including `group_vars/all/main.yml`).
Remember to keep the default site for security purposes if you don't have a specific reason to override it.

```yaml
nginx_sites_confs:
  - src: no-default.conf.j2
  - src: nginx-includes/example.conf.site.j2
```

The example above designates a site template in the `nginx-includes` path on your local machine (i.e., the default path for `nginx_includes_templates_path` variable; see [`include` files](#include-files) section above). You may choose a different path and assign the template any name and file extension you wish. When using the `nginx-includes` path, however, avoid using a filename that matches the `*.conf.j2` pattern required for `include` files described above.

### Create a site template

Create your site templates at the paths you designated in the `nginx_sites_confs` variable described above. Templates should start with an `# {{ ansible_managed }}` statement to indicate that the file is [managed by ansible](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/intro_configuration.html#ansible-managed).

#### Template example

Here is an example site template that hosts nginx default page, listening on `example.com` non-standard port 8080.

```nginx
# {{ ansible_managed }}

server {
  listen 8080;
  server_name example.com;

  root /var/www/html;
  index index.html index.htm index.nginx-debian.html;

  location / {
    # First attempt to serve request as file, then
    # as directory, then fall back to displaying a 404.
    try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
  }
}
```

### File cleanup
By default, Trellis will remove from the remote's `site-enabled` directory any link to a site conf file that has its `enabled` attribute set to `false`.
There is no cleanup of the confs in `sites-available`, they're only made mute by being disabled.

This examples shows the addition of the above site template, while also disabling Trellis' default site.
```yaml
nginx_sites_confs:
  - src: no-default.conf.j2
    enabled: false
  - src: nginx-includes/example.conf.site.j2
```
